Hello and welcome, everyone,
to a JavaScript adventure
that I hope proves fun and
fruitful for all of us.
My name is Anjana Vakil.
And I hope we're all excited to be here,
to not just talk about some features and
tools and
ecosystems related to the day-to-day lives
of what we do as professional
JavaScript developers.
But also to put those into
practice with some hands-on
projects that we are going
to work through together and
build up into a project that
I hope everyone is going to
be able to take on and
keep working on after this course.
So thank you all so much for
joining me for this.
There is a little site up at
anjana.dev/professional-javascript
where you can find these slides and
all of the links to the different
projects we're gonna be working on,
and all of the resources,
and many, many gifts that I will be
showing you [LAUGH] throughout the course.
And why don't we take a moment
to set ourselves up for
success by wrapping our heads around
what we're gonna be looking at and
thinking about during the course, and
where we're gonna take it from here.
So this is intended to essentially be
a follow on to another course I had done
called JavaScript First Steps
to Professional.
So we do all work from the assumption
that we have taken that course,
we are familiar with the concepts
covered in that course.
However, if you haven't, that'll be there,
we can go back as we need to.
But essentially, if that course
focused more on some of the basic
language features and concepts and
mental models that we need for JavaScript.
The hope for this course, the aim for
our hands on adventure here
is to start moving from
the theoretical in a nice
little tidy artificial
classroom environment of writing
small JavaScript exercises
into the wide weird world of
real world JS development.
And that world is very large and
in charge.
So this is not by any means
a comprehensive overview of everything
there is to know about being
a professional level JavaScript developer,
by no stretch of the imagination.
It is, however, another step forward,
hopefully, into the continuous,
infinite journey that we all have in
front of us of learning JavaScript,
because JavaScript is
a living breathing language.
It is evolving as we learn it.
So there is always something new to learn,
always something new to discover.
And we are focusing here on
trying to move forward and
not necessarily get to an end destination.
It's the journey, not the destination.
So the plan is we are going to
approach this journey in three parts.
So in the first part of the course, we're
gonna talk about some more features of
JavaScript as a language that
are a little bit more advanced,
perhaps a little bit more complex, than
some of the things that we've seen before.
We'll also be doing some review of some
of the concepts that we have seen and
worked with, but
perhaps just want a refresher on.
But some of the new things that
we're going to be talking about,
if you haven't explored these
very much in JavaScript.
Are, for example, how does
JavaScript approach writing programs
in different paradigms of programming,
like functional programming, and
object-oriented programming?
What are some of the conveniences and
features of the language
that we can use to write code
in those different styles?
And how does that feel,
and how does that work?
We're also gonna, in particular,
be talking a lot about objects.
Because in JavaScript are of
the most important and
are going to be something we
need to get very cozy with.
And we're gonna be talking about some
fancy objects that can do special things.
And we're gonna be looking at JavaScript,
not just in the sense of
a language with certain syntax and
certain built-in objects and
variables that we can work with, but
also as a language that sits in the heart
of the web browser, when we're
talking about it on the front end.
And what the web browser gives to us in
terms of all of these amazing APIs for
doing things for the user,
with the user's computer,
all of the different wonderful
web capabilities that the browser
exposes to us that we have
access to through JavaScript.
So we're gonna be talking about
some of those browser APIs and
starting to get our feet wet with poking
around the massive ecosystem of things
that we can do with JavaScript and
the browser.
And in part 1,
we're gonna be focusing on projects that
are what I like to think of as quick wins.
So relatively small,
focused on a particular concept or
skill that we are learning.
And we're going to hopefully be
feeling good about getting some things
implemented from the get go.
So that's part 1.
Then as we move into part 2,
we're going to zoom out a little bit.
And we're gonna be thinking not just
about the features of the language and
the browser environment, but
also some of the tools and
tooling that we need to function as
our day-to-day lives as developers.
And not just write code in our browser
console to check whether one value is or
is not equal to another [LAUGH]
value in JavaScript and
things like that, but
also to actually build things for the web.
So we're gonna talk about things like
version control, and Git, and GitHub.
We're gonna talk about NodeJS,
which is a way to run JavaScript out of
the browser in the backend environment.
We're gonna talk about npm and
the JavaScript package,
Situation, [LAUGH] which
there's plenty to say about.
We're also gonna be looking
at a tool called Vite,
which is going to help us start
developing in a workflow that is very
common to the professional
JavaScript developer's day to day.
And is going to let us move from
the local environment where
we are just writing code on our
own machine to deploying it
to the interwebs for
the rest of the world to see.
And we're gonna be working on
some selfie-related projects,
[LAUGH] moving through
this part of the course.
So I won't give you any spoilers there,
but we will be seeing a lot of memes and
a lot of selfies of Anjana,
so I apologize in advance.
[LAUGH] And then in part 3,
we're really gonna open things up, and
it's gonna start to become more
of a choose your own adventure.
So as we learn these features of
the ecosystem, some of the tools,
we're going to look at
the kind of higher level,
Overwhelm that might ensue from having
a massive language like JavaScript
in terms of its reach, and its community,
and its ecosystem, and all of the things
that we can do with the browser and
on the backend and all of this stuff.
And we're gonna start to choose
our own adventure a little bit,
with taking a given project and
making our own version of it, and
adding new features,
changing the way things work.
And really trying to
make things our own and
start exploring the parts
of web development,
which is a vast universe that we are
excited to learn and excited to play with.
So we're going to be thinking about it
as a little bit more of a hackathon
than a particular exercise
project in part 3 of the course.
So that is the grand plan.
These are some of the main
concepts we're gonna cover.
And in general,
let's keep in mind that we are all,
especially in the web
development community,
coming from different backgrounds,
we have different levels of experience.
Some of us have been working
with computers for decades,
some of us have just gotten
our first jobs in tech, and
we are all welcome and
part of this collective journey.
So there is a spot for
everyone, there is something
everyone can learn and
share with other people.
And the goal here is to focus
on moving forward, again, and
growing our skills and growing our
capabilities to function in this
massive ecosystem of web development,
and not on achieving certain goals.
So the projects will just be a way for us
to start beefing up our JavaScript skills.
And as we go, whatever questions come up,
whatever rabbit holes we wanna dive down,
more than welcome.
This is a journey, like I said, and we're
all gonna be learning from each other,
and hopefully we're gonna end up
somewhere interesting that's further
along in our journey than we started out.